= *API*

An application programming interface (API) is a connection between computers or
between computer programs. It is a type of software interface, offering a
service to other pieces of software. A document or standard that describes how
to build or use such a connection or interface is called an API specification.

== Difference between API and REST API

image::{sourcedir}/api_image.jpg[width=10%, align="center"]

[.text-center]
*_API image..._*


The first thing to understand is that API is the superset while REST API is the
subset. This means all REST APIs are APIs while not all APIs are REST APIs. API
is a broad term while REST API is a specialized API. There are a lot of
differences between an API and REST API. REST stands for Representational State
Transfer while API stands for Application Program Interface. In simple words,
the function of API is to connect one application with the data and services of
another application by granting all the required permissions. Therefore, it is
the connector between two applications, and it is an essential part of any
application development. A REST API is a web service API which uses URIs and
HTTP protocol and JSON for data format. The reason for using REST APIs over
others is due to its simplicity in development with limited resource and fewer
security requirements, browser compatibility, scalability, all of which are
desired for web services.


Difference Between API and REST API –


Difference Between API and REST API – While API is
basically a set of functions and procedures that allow one application to
access the feature of other application, REST is an architectural style for
networked applications on the web. It is limited to client-server based
applications. REST is a set of rules or guidelines to build a web API. There
are many ways to build a web API, and REST is a standard way that will help in
building it faster and also for third-parties to understand it better.
Generally, the comparison between APIs is done between REST and SOAP.  SOAP is
more complex as it offers less freedom and dictates a lot of standards for
implementation. Therefore, REST API is the more preferred style.

Feature Exclusive To REST APIs-

The reason why REST API is more popular than other
types of APIs is that it uses the existing protocols. In most of the other
types of APIs, the developer has to define a protocol for the functioning of
the APIs. However, REST API uses HTTP and therefore, there is no need for
installing any additional libraries for creating and functioning a REST API.
Another advantage of using REST API is that it offers great flexibility. It can
handle different types of calls and returns in different data formats. It is
not confined to XML only like SOAP, and you can return in XML, JSON, YAML, and
others using REST API.




Client-Server – While most of the APIs follow
application-application format, REST API strictly operates on the web concept
of client and server. The client and server are separated from one another, and
each of them can grow individually. This is what flexibility is all about.



Stateless – Not all APIs are stateless, and REST API is which means that the
call request to the API can be made individually and independently. Each call
must have all the data necessary to execute the call. Moreover, it is due to
its stateless property, the storage of cacheable data is possible. Hence, the
speed of executing the calls and handling a large number of incoming calls can
be done faster. Interface – Not many APIs can decouple the client from the
server or one application from another. REST API does it because of its uniform
interface, and it allows the applications to evolve independently without
tightly coupling the services, models, and actions to the API layer.



Scalability – Scalability is a major issue in general APIs. It is not so in
REST APIs, and it is because of its layered architecture that works together.
They form a hierarchy, and therefore, the modular application is possible which
is the key to scalability.

Miscellaneous – REST APIs are the only few APIs that
allow code on demand to be transmitted. One of the biggest advantages has to be
the fact that the users do not have to know the function names and the
parameters in a specific order to execute the REST APIs. It is independent o
the type of platform or language you are using. It is highly reliable and
absolutely simple and transparent in its execution. However, no API is void of
disadvantages. Newer developers find it slightly difficult to implement REST
APIs because of its statelessness. It fails to maintain the state within
sessions.

Conclusion – REST API is a unique API type, and there are a variety
of sectors where it is applicable. Currently, it is extremely popular among
mobile and cloud applications, social networking platforms, automated
applications. Therefore, you should pay enough attention to learn REST API when
you are learning APIs as it is the future of APIs. SOAP API is the main
contender against it, but the application architects are more inclined to REST
APIs these days than SOAP APIs which is also extremely popular. They find it
more important for application integrated design.

*For the source of this see:* https://www.freelancinggig.com/blog/2018/11/02/what-is-the-difference-between-api-and-rest-api/
